This week we feature well renowned South African radio anchor, TV presenter, and football commentator John Perlman. The 62-year-old has been inducted into South Africa’s Radio Hall of Fame and was the 2013 winner of the News and Actuality Presenter of the Year award. Today with John Perlman won the award for Best News and Actuality Show in 2011, in 2019 and 2020. Perlman previously hosted the current affairs radio show Today with John Perlman on Kaya FM which was voted South Africa’s best news and actuality radio show for the second year in a row in 2020. He’s hosted the show since May 2007. Before that, he presented the news programme AM Live on national radio at SAfm for nine years. He’s also worked in television, as a football commentator, and was the presenter of the current affairs programme The Round Table on SABC1. He was also the host of Under the Skin on eNCA. He now hosts the John Perlman Show on 702, weekdays 3 – 6pm. You are to commentate on any football fixture in the world. Which fixture do you choose and why? Barcelona vs Real Madrid. Hopefully, nobody would be listening so I can scream and shout and ooh and aah like a fan – which is what I am these days. Messi or Ronaldo... Who is better? Both brilliant but definitely Messi. Just when you think it cannot be done, he does it. And I love the way he stays on his feet no matter how hard and often he gets fouled. You are able to sit down with any public figure in the world for an interview. Who do you choose to interview and why? Bruce Springsteen. I would choose my five favourite songs and ask him how each of them was created. I am fascinated by the creative process involved with great music. You are on death row. You are given one last meal and drink. What do you choose to eat and drink? A spit-roasted ox – a big one – and a lagoon of red wine. With detailed instructions on where the leftovers should be sent. Who do you predict to win the Uefa Euro’s? And who is your dark horse? Belgium to win. Portugal my dark horse. You are able to invite any three guests in the world for a dinner party. Which three guests do you invite and what do you cook for your guests? Kagiso Rabada – fast bowler Chimamanda Ngozie Adichie – Nigerian writer Esther Perel – psychotherapist/expert on relationships and sexuality. Something that requires us all to chop and slice and hang out in the kitchen cooking together. I will wash up. What one thing has caught your attention on social media in the past week? Can’t remember. Tends to grab me and then let go. Your ultimate holiday destination is......? The Bazaruto Archipelago, islands off the coast of Mozambique. Provided I can stop off in the Kruger Park on the way. The one thing that the lockdown has taught you ...? When I wake up, I say to myself: “All you have is this day. Use it.” When I arrive at the 702 studios, I say to myself: “All you have is today’s show. Enjoy it.” The best and worst thing about being married is ...? The best thing about being married is that the worst thing about being married is pretty good too. The Saturday Star