Johannesburg - When the world went into lockdown in 2020, many people went into a state of shock and angst, fearing for the future. For many, that fear is still justifiable and real, but one young man refused to let even Covid-19 stop him from achieving his dreams. Faced with having to complete his matric exams in a time of global turmoil, Darius Tabane not only did so with flying colours, he also found the time to write a book and invent a gadget to address the country’s pothole dilemma. Tabane, who was just 17 when he wrote his first book, unpretentiously titled, When I Grow Up, said when school days meant reduced lessons, he used the time to “positively influence other people”. “I actually wrote one page and gave it to friends to critique. Now I have written 142 pages of my experience with lockdown and what so many of us have experienced as well,” said the now 18-year-old Monash University student, who is also the founder of a successful fashion brand called DT Clothing Line. Tabane said his book reflects on the journey of life, our socialisation, our values and society’s expectation of young adults. He takes the reader on life’s journey from the perspective of a young adult. Chapter One touches on the adventure that young people go through in the process of self-discovery. Chapter Two looks at how random acts of kindness can feed your soul, and Chapter Three speaks to self-belief and how it can get you very far in life. Speaking about the experience at the book launch event held in Sandton, Tabane said: “I had moments of doubt at some point, but pushed through, remembering that this too was my moment of growth. The nationwide lockdown period of 2020 was a difficult time for everyone, and perhaps more difficult for some than others. “When I found myself locked up at home, I thought of putting the book together to reflect on life experiences, what I have observed growing up within my community, and on other pertinent issues around the meaning of growth, spirituality and our beliefs, God and our purpose.” The Centurion resident told Saturday Star the narrative for the book came from his observations of the world around him, of observations made at school, his experiences being raised by a single mother, and seeing how life circumstances impact young people and the old alike; how these circumstances can determine one’s fate if one does not view them as a passing phase in one’s life. As for his pothole markers, Tabane said his research indicates that 49% of accidents are caused by potholes and he hopes his markers can decrease accidents by up to 80%. “We are now busy with an app that can track the markers and alert drivers of where the potholes are. I was actually inspired by someone else and turned that inspiration into doing something to help people here at home.” His passion for other young people is evident in his book, and he hopes his experiences will inspire those beaten down by Covid-19, unemployment, bullying and teenage pregnancy. “I believe that no matter what other people say, chase your dreams. Your dreams are on the other side of your fears. I find that people with the loudest voices are those with money and power and they are the ones being heard. My book speaks for those who don’t have voices,” said Tabane. The young man said he lives by his mantra: time – what you spend your time on is who you will become; choices - where you are now is not where you will remain; and remembering joy. Tabane said his vision is to approach corporations to help young people to become the best versions of themselves, especially as the country celebrates Youth Month. When I Grow Up has already garnered rave reviews from a number of broadcasters and media personalities. Dr Onkgopotse JJ Tabane, author and TV talk show host, said the book is a profound journey through life’s lessons. “It is startling that it is written by a teenager, and gives credence to the adage that it’s not the years in your life that matter but the life in those years. Many adults can take life lessons from this simple read; from how to develop their purpose in life, to how to believe in themselves to live life to the fullest. The book explores key themes that shape self-mastery better than many self-help books that I've read. The examples and anecdotes shared make it highly relatable. The author is a bridge between the generations and there is no doubt that his wisdom is light years ahead of his age.” Theo Garrun, author and a former editor at Independent Newspapers, concurs. “When I began reading When I Grow Up, I found myself asking the question that the author said I would be asking in his introduction to the book: ‘What can an 18-year-old boy who hasn’t lived in the real world teach me?’ I read on anyway. I was eventually astounded by the depth of understanding displayed by one so young, and enchanted by the fresh and, yes, childlike perception that Darius Tabane brings to the enduring and often overworked issues that face us all.” Blogger and author Mariam Dube was equally effusive in her praise of the book: “This book will teach you how to get over your fears. If you are young and want to open up to a new world of possibilities, this book is definitely for you. I also recommend it to adults who are still trying to find their true purpose.” Tabane’s book is available at Exclusive Books, Bargain Books, Everybody’s Books, Adams PMB and Clarke’s Book and retails for R200. The Saturday Star