By Sharon Gordon Lubricant is the number-one ingredient for better sex. They guarantee that your intimate time will be soft, slippery, and luxurious. Sex feels better with a good lubricant, and there’s just no exception. Sometimes nature might not provide quite enough moisture, or maybe you want some enhancing lubrication to add warmth or tingles… Lubes are the heaven. Scented, tingling, warming, and more. You can even get waterproof lubes! Lubricant is a fantastic, sex-enhancing product specifically designed to increase slickness between moving body parts. Some people have the erroneous idea that hot sex doesn’t need any help by way of extra lube–that if you need lube, you must not be turned on. This is simply not true. There are many factors–including hormone levels, diet, and stress–that contribute to how much natural wetness one’s body produces. And lube is absolutely essential for anal play. When it comes to sex, the wetter the better! Lubricants are made from various ingredients and come in many different formulas, textures, tastes, all for different occasions and preferences.  Before you decide which lube is right for you, consider what you will be using it for: The vast majority of the lubes we carry are water-based. These include such well known brands as Feminine Revolution, Assegai, ID, Pjur. Water-based lubes are highly versatile, perfect for self-pleasure, internal and external use. Because the first ingredient of a water-based lube is water, these lubes tend not to irritate genital tissue as often as other types of lubes. Another great plus of water-based lubes is they are compatible with virtually any material–latex, silicone and cyberskin. They do have a tendency to dry-out, leaving the lubed area feeling tacky more quickly than silicone or oil-based lube. This can easily be remedied by adding a little water to the lubed-up areas. I love the Pjur range of lubricants because they never go sticky! They are pricy but you use so little that a 100ml bottle will last ages. Many water-based lubes come in liquid, cream and gel formulas. Liquid being the thinnest, cream in the middle and gels towards the thickest end of the spectrum. I prefer the liquid lubricant but its a personal choice. For anal play, we especially recommend gels, such as Assegai and Mega Glide Aqua Gel, as gels are heavier and provide extra-slick protection for sensitive anal tissue. I think silicone-based lubricants are better for anal play. An oil-based lubricant, such as the Yes Oil Based, is fun for male pleasure. While longer-lasting than water-based lubes, oil-based lubes can cause yeast-infections in some women and are not compatible with latex, including diaphragms and cervical caps that are made from rubber. Never use an oil-based lube with condoms, as oils will make condoms break in about 30 seconds. Flavoured lubricants, like Durex, Assagai, Kama Sutra Oils of Love, Intimate Organics and ID Juicy Lube, is a blast for external use including oral sex, but can cause irritation for many women so we don’t recommend these lubes for internal use. Some makes are even sugar free! Silicone lubes, such as Wet Platinum, Pjur Original Bodyglide, Beauments silicone, Mega Bodyglide Premium Silicone, provide extra slipperiness. And these lubes last a good, long while. They’re an excellent choice for shower or toy play, as silicone lube stays slick in the water. They are  also odourless and almost tasteless. Clean-up can take a while but will wash off with concerted effort of warm water and soap or a toy cleaner – Try Eva Toy Cleaner. Silicone lubes aren’t recommended for use with silicone or softskin/cyberskin toys, as a chemical reaction between materials is possible. Silicone Lube is safe with latex and is also a good choice for anal play because of their staying power. Glycerine is a natural sugar compound, often found in soap, which can make things slippery. Many popular brands of lube contain glycerine, including ID and Wet. Glycerine can also alter the pH balance of some people, and therefore women who are prone to yeast infections and anyone who experiences genital sensitivity may want to stay away from lubes containing glycerine. There are many glycerine-free options to choose from just check out the ingredients usually listed on the bottle. When it comes to lubricant be discerning – cheaper is not better For those who prefer natural (and shorter) lists of ingredients, you can use coconut oil or at a push olive oil. Pjur and Intimate Organics now have a vegan range and is 100% certified organic ingredients. Which Lube is right for you? To find the perfect lube for you, take a few things into consideration: ingredients, what kind of activity you will be using it for and personal preference regarding consistency (cream, gel or a liquid). Some may find they have allergies to certain ingredients like glycerine or propylene glycol, so please read the descriptions for each lube carefully. Lubricant is the bomb! You can put it everywhere – think slippy slide. Watch our video where we discuss why wetter is better. The Saturday Star