Johannesburg - Four and a half decades ago, thousands of Soweto students took to the streets in outrage to protest over the use of Afrikaans and English as the languages of school instruction amongst other injustices. Forty-five (45) years later, a local reading organisation has insisted that there is still not enough African literature in South Africa and during Youth Month this year, is appealing for aspiring and established authors to donate their original African language stories to them. The Nal’ibali reading-for-enjoyment campaign explained that this initiative is not a money making scheme, but to enable youngsters to read books written in their mother tongue. “Donated stories will not be used for commercial gain but shared on Nal’ibali’s free national platforms to benefit children and caregivers across the country,” the organisation’s content developer Brigotte Naicker said. She explained that the initiative is to address the drastic shortage of books written in African languages in the country. “South Africa faces a critical lack of children’s literature in indigenous languages and Nal’ibali believes it is these stories that motivate and inspire children to learn to read and help them sustain this essential habit.” Naicker believes that in order for children to fall in love with reading, they need to hear and read stories in languages they understand and to see characters that they can relate to, reflected in books. “An important part of this is seeing children that look, think and speak as they do and who live in settings like theirs.” The lack of indigenous language books is evident in the recent Publishers Associated of South Africa (PASA) statistics which revealed that 65% of children’s books, published between 2000 and 2015, were produced in English and Afrikaans. This was in stark contrast to the just 7% in South Africa’s most widely spoken language, isiZulu. In a bid to rectify this, Nal’ibali has for nine years, been producing, translating, illustrating and freely sharing original, good quality children’s stories in all 11 official languages across South Africa. “Since 2012, we have produced more than 400 audio stories and printed more than 500 stories in its bilingual newspaper story supplement, distributed to reading clubs, literary organisations, partners, and the public in all provinces,” said Naicker. She also believes that the donation of African children’s literature this Youth Month will help Nal’ibali maintain a supply of fresh indigenous-language stories for free distribution to children and caregivers. The Nal’ibali’s platform will also assist youth and emerging authors of these African-language books. “Authors of selected stories will receive guidance from Nal’ibali’s publishing team,” Naicker said. “Their stories will be edited, translated, and potentially illustrated by the campaign before being shared on its official on-air, print or online platforms.” In order to give emerging African writers the tools to produce high quality stories, Nal’ibali will next week be hosting a free virtual workshop on how to write children’s stories. “Hosted by professional storyteller, children’s author and Nal’ibali Literacy Mentor, Madoda Ndlakuse, the workshop will take participants through the crucial considerations for writing for children,” said Naiker. “These include why and when stories need to be enjoyable rather than educational, the importance of locally contextualised settings, themes and characters, and the difference that language can make in terms of exposure to mother tongue texts as well as what to bear in mind in terms of translation.” The webinar will also include a keynote address by Africa’s youngest award-winning author, 14-year-old Stacey Fru. “Stacey will be encouraging participants to get involved, no matter their age or experience, highlighting creativity and passion as essential drivers of success.” Local author Melody Ngomane was one of the writers who benefited from Fru’s mentorship as well as the Nal’ibali platform as a whole. “I used to listen to Nal’ibali’s stories on the radio and knew that working with such a large-scale national campaign would ignite my career as an author,” Ngomane said. Since submitting her first story in 2019 and under Nal’ibali’s guidance, Ngomane has had five stories accepted by the campaign for use on its multilingual national platforms. Guidelines on the type of stories that can be submitted to Nal’ibali, as well as where to send them are available on the Nal’ibali website, www.nalibali.org, as are details of the mini writing workshop taking place on 23 June. The Saturday Star