Johannesburg - From crisis comes opportunity and this saying proved to be as true over 80 years ago as it is now. This is as the age-old lay-buying concept is making a comeback as an increasing number of consumers who have been hard hit by the Covid-19 pandemic, are looking for more affordable ways to purchase goods. Another historical world event caused a similar revolution in the 1930s during the Great Depression when the ancient shopping concept was born. During the time, the world was suffering from the devastating effects of the worldwide economic downturn and merchants were looking for a way to attract cash-strapped shoppers without any risk. For decades following that, the innovative payment solution that allowed consumers to secure items for purchase, pay smaller amounts over time, and then eventually take ownership of the item once fully paid for, was widely used. But by the 1950s, the emergence of credit cards became a more common alternative. However, since the novel coronavirus erupted in almost every corner of the globe early last year, financially hard-hit consumers are once again desperate to purchase goods as affordable as possible while also avoiding debt in order to do so. This has led to the re-emergence of lay-bys but with the current increased e-commerce capabilities and technological advancements, the age-old payment method has been given a digital reboot. In South Africa, recent shopping phenomenons such as PayFlex which has disrupted the local online shopping trends market, might have borrowed elements of the lay-buying concept but as founder and CEO Paul Behrmann explains, their platform has given the old-fashioned payment option a digital makeover. “By leveraging new payment technologies, the part-payment platform is aiming to provide consumers with more affordable access to credit and a dramatically improved user experience,” he said. “But, there is a key difference between old-school lay-by programmes, and part-payment or BNPL platforms as shoppers using the BNPL solution receive instant access to their purchase as they pay it off.” Launched in the country in 2018, just ahead of the eruption of the novel coronavirus on every continent, the “Buy Now Pay Later (BNPL) interest free” shopping revolution has also been a hit in the US, Australia and Europe with 5.7 million users worldwide. It recently entered the South African market through a collaboration with Superbalist, one of South Africa’s leading online fashion merchants but now has over 80 000 customers and more than 600 retailer partners in the country, including Cotton-on and The Pro Shop. Behrmann said Payflex is hugely popular amongst the younger generation, as they value its speed, convenience, and transparency. “We’re in the midst of a payment technology revolution as the purchasing process shifts dramatically towards instant and frictionless payments and as shoppers, particularly millennials and Gen Z, look for more transparent, flexible ways to pay, BNPL has given lay-by a digital reboot that is designed for the omnichannel shopping era.” Behrmann added that those eager to use platforms like PayFlex are also usually highly digitally-literate with digital-first preferences, and are eager to avoid accruing the amounts of debt that they witnessed their parents suffer to pay off. This is echoed by research from consumer spending data firm Cardify.ai, which found Gen Z and younger millennials account for more than 80% of BNPL transactions. But generally, Behrmann believes that the concept of lay-buying and the updated BNPL platforms like Payflex are widely used because of the flexibility it offers. “This flexibility enables consumers to shop more frequently, boosting ecommerce sales with shoppers shopping with Payflex 5.5 times per quarter sales while enabling shoppers to save costs where they would traditionally be charged interest by the traditional credit card model.” Meanwhile, the global BNPL market is projected to grow from $353 billion in 2020 to $680 billion in 2025 and similarly, it is estimated that this industry is expected to grow to 15 times its current size in the next few years to account for US$1 trillion of annual merchandising volume. Closer to home, Payflex grew from a shopper base of 2 000 to 100 000 in just 12 months and in addition, its customer base grew from 70 merchants in 2019 to more than 750 this year. While BNPL platforms are currently increasing in popularity, Behrmann believes that rapid shifts in consumer behaviour and the continued rise in eCommerce will continue to fuel a global demand for flexible payment options. “Consumers are expecting the option to pay at a frequency that works for them when they reach checkout in 2021, regardless of the channels on which they shop. “As such, we expect BNPL to become as ubiquitous as offering EFT or credit card payments at checkout as shoppers place increased value on payment flexibility without hidden fees and charges – as well as a highly convenient checkout process.” The Saturday Star