Johannesburg - This week we feature South African radio and TV broadcaster, award-winning journalist, and author Iman Rappetti. The 36-year-old Durban born news anchor has more than 15 years of experience in the media industry, with her most recent stint coming at Power FM where she co-anchored the Power Breakfast. On the TV front, she co-anchored News Night with Jeremy Maggs for more than five years and chaired Madam Speaker on eNCA. She has also successfully MC’d large corporate and public events. This award-winning journalist has experience in online, print, radio and broadcast journalism and has covered stories all the way from the Middle East to Africa and the US, with politics as her main focus. In 2011 she hosted then US first lady Michelle Obama on her first SA tour as part of the Young African Women’s Leadership Forum, serving as an anchor for a talk between Obama and young African female leaders. On the speaking front, Rappetti has interviewed many of SA’s movers and shakers as well as celebrities like Oprah Winfrey and Richard Branson. She is also an author and has published books such as Sermons of Soul as well as Becoming Iman: An Adventure Through Rebellion, Religion, and Reason. You’re stuck in a lift with Helen Zille. What’s the first thing you ask her? Going down? Your favourite restaurant in South Africa is… ? And what do you order? The Fire Room at Monte Casino – Sticky Edamame Beans to start with Hong Kong Pears, then Thai Green Chicken Curry for mains. They’ve got stunning gin cocktails that come smoking! If you could choose any actress to play you in a story about your life. Who would you choose and why? Firstly, yes! Secondly, I love Gugu Mbatha Raw. She has gravitas and the perfect range I think, to relate to all my extremes. Your favourite outfit in your wardrobe currently is… ? Everything black, but especially the double-breasted ankle length vintage military coat I got at London’s famous Camden Market! I feel like giving orders in it. Which song would describe your life right now? No all-encompassing song springs to mind, however if I choose what makes me feel sexy and super groovy it would be Wizkid Essence! The biggest misconception people have of Iman Rappetti is? That I am hard on people in everyday life as I am with those I’ve had to hold to account on TV or radio. I’m quite loving and peaceful actually! You can only shop at one clothing store for the rest of your life. Which store do you choose? This is a horrible scenario, I must say. I am sometimes contradictory in my sartorial choices, I love vintage and also ultra-modern and unique, and I can’t think of one store that would fulfil those needs. I guess I’d better buy a sewing machine and get on my knees and pray! What is the one thing that has caught your attention on social media in the past week? The story about SA being pregnant with possibilities, the so-called Tembisa 10. I feel for those families and worry about things not ending well. We’ve all had some horrible dates. Tell us about your worst one… There was this one time I took someone home and the date ended when he took off his shoes. I thought ’if your feet smell this bad then… ’ You are able to spend the day with any well-known public figure learning his or her trade. Who do you choose to spend the day with? I’d need more than just a day with Christine Lagarde, head of the European Central Bank. I love economics and love to have an insider’s view on how big money operates. The Saturday Star