By Hlulani Mashaba Road incidents have become a regular occurrence and a threat in our country, and as we approach the Easter season holidays, this calls for intensive road safety education campaigns aimed at changing the attitude, behaviour and ultimately saving the lives of road users. Many of the road accidents the province continues to experience are a result of motorists driving under the influence of alcohol and speeding. Just this week alone, over 34 drivers were arrested by the Gauteng Traffic Police for exceeding the speed limit, with the highest speed recorded at 233 km/h while forty drivers were arrested during the long weekend for driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor. This is a cause for concern for the province which normally records the highest fatalities as a result of unwarranted road crashes. With the Easter holiday season fast approaching, there are growing concerns already that the province can experience fatalities involving public transport operators as is the norm with any holiday season. This is fuelled by the rush to make profit since many holidaymakers are expected to visit places such as places of worship and their respective home towns. The Gauteng Traffic Police will be involved in vigorous law enforcement operations to ensure compliance with the National Road Traffic Act and the National Land Transport Act. Due to the high number of road fatalities experienced in the province, especially during busy times such as this, the Gauteng Traffic Police and various traffic law enforcement authorities will conduct various operations such as Pedestrian operations, drunken driving operations, visible patrolling, K78 roadblocks, driver and vehicle fitness operations, speed law enforcement operations, reckless and negligent driving operations and incident management to mention a few to ensure reduction in road fatalities. The Easter season is one of the busiest holidays of the year. People will want to be on the road regardless of the curfew. The reality is that the Covid-19 pandemic is still in our midst, it is important to adhere to the regulations set by the government to flatten the curve of the virus. The curfew in Level 1 of National Lockdown takes place between midnight and 4am. Curfew is a regulation requiring people to remain indoors between specified hours. The authorities have observed that a high number of fatal crashes, including those involving pedestrian, occur at night time, despite traffic volumes being lower during such times. Statistics for 2016 show that most crashes occurred between 6pm and 10pm, and 69% of these crashes occurred from Thursday to Sunday. As many road users prepare for long-distance travel, there is no guarantee that most people will reach their destinations safely since many roads will be congested. Therefore, there is a need to display mutual respect for one another’s life and greater tolerance on our roads since every life is precious and must be preserved. All road users are called upon to be more cautious in an effort to save lives. One of the major challenges that the country continues to face is road users driving under the influence of alcohol. Drunk driving carries heavy penalties and frequently results in accidents. People who drive under the influence of alcohol drive recklessly and do not adhere to road safety rules. It is worth noting that alcohol affects visibility, judgement and the ability to react. More and more pedestrians are victims of accidents due to walking under the influence of alcohol. It is significant for pedestrians to stay alert on the roads and avoid distractions whatsoever. Texting and walking is a serious concern. Pedestrians are urged to wear reflective clothes that enhance visibility. With the Easter season is fast approaching, it is critical for road users to plan the route to their destinations for their safe arrival. Vehicles must be roadworthy before road users embark on a long-distance journey. It is also important for road users to stick to major routes and to ensure they have enough fuel if they travel using back routes. It is also important that road users stop at regular intervals, like every two hours or 200 kms to avoid fatigue, especially when travelling long distances. Distractions such as cell phone conversations and texting while driving should be avoided. The general speed limit must be adhered to and dangerous overtaking must be avoided. The Gauteng Traffic Police will also be on high alert regarding the weighing of overloaded vehicles as a result of high volume of freight vehicles entering and exiting the province. During weekends and public holidays, there is an increase of Malayishas (Taxis with heavy loaded trailers). These vehicles causing several fatal crashes due to overloading and towing vehicles cannot handle the weight of these loaded trailers. Crime levels also tend to increase in South Africa. There are incidents where criminals plant nails on the roads during the night,  punching the tyres of vehicles which will result in fatal accidents. The purpose of these plots is to rob the drivers of vehicles and their belongings and car hijackings. The number of fatalities during the Easter holiday season will be determined by the way road users conduct themselves. Saving lives on our roads remains paramount, but the onus rests on road users to ensure they are safe. Road safety is everybody’s responsibility. *Mashaba is Gauteng Department of Community Safety Acting Deputy Director, Media Relations The Saturday Star