“There has been absolutely no socialising for me since we went into lockdown,” insisted Superintendent Wayne Minnaar. The Johannesburg Metro Police Department (JMPD) spokesperson has, instead, been hitting the streets of Johannesburg since the countrywide shutdown which officially began on March 26 last year. As frontline workers, Minnaar and his colleagues did not have the opportunity to ‘work from home’ and instead, were exposed to the novel coronavirus during their patrols of the city. “It has been a very, very challenging time for me, and for many others in the JMPD,” Minnaar told The Saturday this week ahead of the first anniversary of the lockdown. Together with the SA Police Service (SAPS) and the Gauteng Traffic Police (GTP), the JMPD has been at the forefront of the lockdown as they enforce regulations. “I would say that a large percentage of the community have been complying with the Covid regulations but there have been many challenges.” He cited breaking curfew, the use of alcohol and the behaviour of some youngsters as the main violations they had to deal with. Minnaar explained that the mood inside the law enforcement agency has often been sombre as many members have contracted the virus, with some even dying from it. “It has been very sad and scary but we are just trying to continue to do our best to serve the city.” As a frontline worker, Minnaar feared that he could be exposed to the virus and possibly spread it to loved ones. “I have been concerned about possibly coming home and infecting my family, but by the Grace of God, we remained Covid-19 free.” But while Minnaar is in good health, carrying out his duties during the lockdown has meant that he was unable to see his many friends and family. “There were many people I couldn't see this year, especially the senior members of our family.” During this unprecedented period, the JMPD spokesperson believes that it is the support and understanding of his family and colleagues who saw him through the hard times. While Covid-19 infection rates are currently on the decline and the country is in level 1 lockdown, Minnaar has urged Joburgers to remain vigilant and continue to comply with regulations. “We are not out of the woods yet and there is still much more work to be done.” Until then, Minnaar said he is looking forward to enjoying more freedom. “When this is all over, I just want to live a normal life and go into public space without so much fear. “The one thing from the pandemic I will keep is the hand washing, it is always good to wash your hands.” The Saturday Star