Proteas fast bowler Lungi Ngidi wants to use his influence as a sports star to help the fight against gender-based violence in South Africa. The 24-year-old son of Durban has always kept his work off the field private, but he believes it’s time he was more vocal about his off-field activities. “I usually keep my work off the field private but I realised that using your voice and getting a lot more people to chip in is a lot more beneficial for the people you are trying to help. I have been trying to get a bit more vocal,” Ngidi said. While Ngidi is working on a number of projects off the field, including helping educate youngsters in the country, his main work focuses on helping women and children ‒ even though he’s mum on details for now. “We all know the statistics around gender-based violence. I would like to make a difference in any way possible. It has been kept under wraps, but it is moving towards getting a lot more people involved.” Ngidi, who now plays for the Titans when he isn’t representing the country, is also passionate about preparing South African youth for the future. “Lockdown really helped me to realise the main thing is friends, family and the community around you. My main focus is to try to help young people move away from the greed and obsession over materialistic things; things like popularity, those are the things that lead you astray. “Sometimes it’s important to test your morals and ways. Being able to change that mindset will make a massive difference in the communities and within young people, to make them motivated to become leaders of this country.” Having grown up poor community in KZN, Ngidi also knows how important it is for underprivileged youth to know that no dream is unachievable, no matter the circumstances. “My dad first started out as a petrol attendant, my mom wasn’t working, and we lived off my dad’s garage tips. “They became domestic workers – which wasn’t really anything glamorous – but they made sure we had everything we needed as kids. “Kids would sometimes show off the expensive stuff they got for Christmas and holidays, and for me as a kid, not being able to have those things, was disheartening at times. “It was tough growing up, but I am also grateful for the way I grew up. I don’t think I would be where I am if it wasn’t for that past.” “I knew that my family cared about me, wanted me to succeed and do well in what I wanted to do,” said Ngidi, who is regarded as one of the best fast bowlers in the world. “I was fortunate to have a lot of people who helped me, like going on tours. My parents couldn’t afford to buy me certain things, other parents and coaches would then help out.” Ngidi attended Highbury and Hilton thanks to scholarships. “My childhood helped me because I have always appreciated the little things in life, I think that has helped me to succeed. I never take for granted anything I have, or anywhere I am. That has helped me a lot in my career. “Once I am under pressure I always revert to where it started, it helps me realise that it’s not the be-all and end-all of life. As long as you are happy and healthy, those are the most important things.” So it’s hardly a surprise that Ngidi considers what he does off-the-field just as important as what he does on the field. “I think performances on the field bring a lot of eyes towards you, and once you have a lot of eyes on you, people want to hear from you.” “They want to hear the way you think and what you value. There are also a lot of kids who look up to you, they are the future of South Africa, they are the people you want to influence.” Ngidi’s advice to young people is to stay humble and work hard, keep your ears open and never forget where you came from. “We sometimes act like we know it all and know how to fix things, but sometimes listening is the most useful tool we have as human beings.” “We learn from others, we learn from others’ mistakes, you ask questions. I think I will always want to keep learning, that is the only way I will carry on improving in life.” “Not everyone reaches success, in the end, not everyone’s success looks the same, that is one thing important that the youth need to remember.” Aside from working on several different causes, Ngidi has also used the lockdown to turn a dream into reality for his mother, Bongi, recently building her a home.. “That was a very special moment. That has been a work in progress for a very long time. “My mom grew up in a one bedroom house – so did we for a certain stage when my dad was still a petrol attendant. It was tough for her and I don’t think she ever thought she would have her own house. I am grateful that I was blessed with the opportunity to give her something like that.” Ngidi also spoke about becoming the first cricketer to be signed up by Rap mogul Jay-Z’s international sports management agency Roc Nation, joining compatriots, Springbok World Cup winners captain Siya Kolisi and Cheslin Kolbe. “There are a family that is trying to help build the dream and help you succeed as a person, not just as a sportsman. They also help you influence the communities and the people around you, they help you to drive change.” The Saturday Star