In this week’s A-typical interview we feature South African actress Jane de Wet. De Wet is well known for her roles in TV productions such as Still Breathing, The Watch, and Trackers, as well as local films Moffie, Griekwastad, Rage and Parable. The 25 year old also plays the role of Lexi in current hit local TV series The Girl From St Agnes. You are given the option of starring alongside either Leonardo Di Caprio or Brad Pitt in a Hollywood blockbuster. Who do you choose? Indeed a Sophie’s Choice. In the same way I hope sushi doesn’t hear me when I choose pizza, I hope Brad doesn’t hear me when I choose Leo, because they sure are equally delicious. I’m going with Leo since he starred in two personally influential films: Revolutionary Road and Wolf of Wall Street. Your favourite restaurant in South Africa is… And what do you normally order? Clarke’s in Cape Town – best veggie burger in the country. Your most challenging role as an actress was… ? Portraying the role of Marthella in Griekwastad was both an honour and a terrifying challenge. I felt an immense responsibility towards her and her loved ones to tell her story truthfully and tenderly – a tribute to a beautiful soul. Placing myself in her shoes and trying to fathom merely a fraction of the confusion, fear, anguish and excruciating pain she suffered, was taxing on the best of days, incapacitating on the worst. It was emotionally depleting. You are stuck on an island with your fellow cast members of Still Breathing. You have to split into teams of two in order to gather food and survive. Which cast member do you choose to team up with? Shannon Esra – she’s smart, strong, resourceful and downright hilarious. If the food’s scarce, at least the entertainment will be abundant. Your celebrity crush growing up was… ? Channing Tatum – my friends even had his face printed on a pillow for my 16th birthday so that I could kiss him goodnight every evening. And before you say anything, have you SEEN Magic Mike? The biggest misconception people have of Jane De Wet is? My size! Whenever I meet someone who has only seen me on screen, their first reaction tends to be “I thought you were much taller!” The screen can be deceiving, since there’s very little scale, but the truth is – I’m “Emilia Clarke/Lady Gaga” kind of short. A full 5’2”. The one thing your fans don’t know about you is… ? I’ve known I wanted to be an actor for as long as I can remember. People often think because I studied BCom Management Sciences, I had some sort of awakening at the age of 21 where I decided to just “try this acting thing”. Although that has worked for some, that certainly is not my story. I’ve devoted my entire life to the performing arts – first as a dancer, then as a theatre actor and in recent years, as a film actor (my true love). What has caught your attention on social media in the last week? I’m witnessing trends towards supporting local and an appreciation for community over competition. I believe Covid-19 has forced us to re-evaluate our priorities and taught us the power of compassion, kindness and community. I’m seeing more and more actors post about their “competitors’” successes; influencers opting for local slow-fashion over mass-produced fast fashion and real-talk in general. And I have to say – I AM SO HERE FOR IT. Let’s keep spreading love. You are able to shoot a movie in any location in the world. Which location do you choose? Anywhere in nature. Give me a month in the mountains – perhaps the Himalayas! Or a tropical forest like the Amazon. Or place me on the back of a horse somewhere in the French countryside. Anywhere I can hear the voice of Mother Nature – it keeps me grounded. Your current favourite three TV series are? Bridgerton, Queen’s Gambit, and The Crown. The Saturday Star