Captain Kay Makhubela longs for the day he can pick up his young grandchildren, spin them in the air and give them hugs and kisses. The Gauteng Provincial police spokesperson has been hard at work in the streets of ever since the country went into lockdown almost a year ago. And as a frontline worker, Makhubela has had to sacrifice a lot of his personal life in order to fully carry out his duties. “I haven't been able to hug or kiss my family since we went into lockdown,” he explained to The Saturday Star this week. “When I get home from work, my grandchildren run to me but I have to be so careful with them and even when I am at home with my family I make sure not to sit too close to them.” Apart from the challenges of the job, the Covid-19 pandemic hit close to home for the police captain. “My son got the virus last year and was even admitted into hospital but, thank God, he survived.” Makhubela also had to consider the risk factor when a close relative died from the novel coronavirus and he had to decide whether he could attend the funeral or not. “I decided that it was too much of a risk to go to the funeral because I already risk my life everyday when I wake up and go to work and it just isn't worth the extra threat.” While the global health crisis has made Makhubela’s job even more challenging, he is determined to serve the people of Gauteng, who are experiencing an unprecedented time of their lives. “It's about commitment and telling yourself that this is the work of a public servant.” Makhubela is so dedicated to his job that he spent most of the festive season, when the second wave of Covid-19 infections erupted in the country, hard at work and away from his family and friends. “It is very important for me to make sure that the people of Gauteng are doing all they can to protect themselves and their loved ones from the virus.” While he believes that most of the province’s population complied with Covid-19 regulations and largely abided by the rules of the lockdown, Makhubela admitted that they did encounter those who were out in the streets when they shouldn’t have been and consumed alcohol when it was banned. The police captain and his colleagues might be hard at work enforcing regulations in a bid to keep those in Gauteng safe from Covid-19, but many members of the force contracted the virus with some even dying from it. “The mood within the SAPS has not always been good during the lockdown because many of our colleagues tested positive for Covid-19 and sadly passed away.” “There was a time when this was happening often and we would all be so scared and wonder ‘when is this going to happen to me?’” While Makhubela admitted that his family were apprehensive about him hitting the streets and being exposed to the virus, he believes that their support carried him through his darkest days. As he awaits news of when he will receive his Covid-19 vaccine, Makhubela is yearning for the day when he can get all his loved ones together under one roof. “The first thing I want to do is rest, see my family, give them all a big hug and kiss and enjoy a meal with them, this is something I have missed doing so much.” The Saturday Star