This week we feature Zimbabwe-born Canadian hip hop artist Charmaine. She is regarded as one of Zimbabwe’s best female rappers, and released her debut single Bold  last year. The artist was recently signed to Warner Music Canada and will release her debut EP this year. Last week she released her newest single, Woo, which has been causing waves in Africa and the rest of the world. You are able to collaborate with either Nicki Minaj or Cardi B. Who do you choose? I would love to collaborate with both of these phenomenally talented women! They both offer different vibes for me and I think I could make a dope record with both of them. Which has the better food, Zimbabwe or Canada? Definitely Zimbabwe! Of course! The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is? We call it sadza. It’s the cornmeal porridge that you eat with your hands with stew. Tupac or Biggie, who was the better rapper in your opinion? I’m biased on this because I love Tupac haha! Both were dope though. What is the biggest misconception people have of you? A lot of people seem to think I’m not nice lmao. I’m literally the nicest person you’ll ever meet and they get so shocked when they realise it too. The best thing about living in Toronto is? The multiculturalism is beautiful. Seeing so many people from different backgrounds coexist and interact is amazing. What do you miss most about Zimbabwe? I miss the warm weather! I am definitely not built for the snow. Which song title best sums up your life? I’m going to be biased and say Don’t Care off my new project. That’s who I am in a nutshell. I don’t care about anything that doesn’t contribute to my peace of mind or goals in life. If you were able to spend a day learning from any rapper in the world, who would it be and why? Hands down, Missy Elliot. I’d love to see her in her element, get advice on how she navigates as a black woman in this business and how she overcame any hurdles that were put in front of her. What one thing has caught your attention on social media in the last week? Definitely Cardi B being the first female rapper to have a diamond record! That is crazy. She is goals AF. The Saturday Star