In this week’s A-typical interview, we feature singer, songwriter, and entertainer Dantanio Goodman. Goodman is known worldwide for his Michael Jackson impersonation and is the star of Showtime Australia’s Michael Jackson History show, a tribute to the icon's musical career. Goodman is also a musician and recently released his latest solo single Unstoppable, which was inspired by the Covid-19 pandemic. Born to a Gospel-singing family in Kimberly, South Africa, Goodman began singing and dancing at the age of nine, developing a vocal repertoire spanning Pop, R’n’B, Swing, Jazz and Reggae. He went on to carve out a diverse career in the entertainment industry including theatrical work, song-writing for contemporary pop stars and the release of two solo albums. The best album you own is... My Michael Jackson collection. (Off the wall, Thriller, Bad, Dangerous, History  and Xscape) If you could spend a day with any musician in the world learning his or her trade, who would it be and why? I would love to meet and spend time with Mr Lionel Richie, to learn about his writing skills and how he approaches a song for production. And also to thank him for never giving up. The greatest Michael Jackson song ever made was...? In my humble opinion, I consider Billy Jean one of the greatest MJ songs. We still hear samples of it used in today's music mixes. But Thriller  is number one as it is still the biggest selling album of all time. The biggest misconception people have of Dantanio Goodman is...? I'm surprised how some people think I have a shrine of Michael Jackson in my house. This is not true. I have one poster of MJ only. Your go-to dance move is ...? The electric slide ... Everybody still does it and it always gets the dance floor going. You are able to invite three guests for your fantasy dinner. Who would you invite? I would definitely invite Mr Jermaine Jackson who I had the honour of meeting in August 2018, Lionel Richie and Quincy Jones. Your celebrity crush growing up was...? Salma Hayek, who I first saw in the movie Desperado  with Antonio Banderas. You are on death row. You are allowed one last meal and drink. What do you choose to have? Lobster with a side salad and a glass of white wine. The toughest period in your career as an entertainer was...? Moving up to Johannesburg from Kimberley 20 years ago, we hardly had anything to eat at times and I had to sleep on the floor. I was 19-years-old. What is the best clothing item in your closet currently? My favourite item right now is my suede velvet jacket. I always feel very royal when wearing it. The Saturday Star