For months, millions of South Africans spent their time in isolation stuck on the couch and glued to their screens. In a bid to get the nation moving again, MultiChoice this week released a brand-new season of its hit programme, the 5 Colour Fitness show, which will be aired on a variety of DStv’s platforms. Season 5 of the hit show, the latest instalment, follows the success of the previous seasons which debut last year. It was launched by Fitness Health Active (FHA), a sister company of the renowned Gresham Group. But this latest season is far from your average home workout videos. The Safari edition of the 5 Colour Fitness show was filmed at the serene Aquila Private Game Reserve in the Western Cape, a four-star family friendly destination which features an array of wildlife, spectacular scenery and a real feel for the outdoors. FHA executive director Berne van Zyl explained to the Saturday Star this week that while the 5 Colour Fitness show’s focus is on exercise and wellness, it also hopes to contribute towards the salvation of local industries which have been hard-hit by the pandemic. “We take Africa on a travel journey to exotic locations and so we are able to give back to tourism. “We also include fashion and beauty into our programme because we believe everyone wants to feel good and look good too.” But one of the show’s presenter’s Lucas Mthenjane believes that the the 5 Colour Fitness show’s accessibility and purpose has been major reasons for its success. “We present authentic workouts suited to the whole family, they are easy to follow and it motivates South Africans,” the fitness enthusiast said. “South Africa has seen a high rise of mental illness and by encouraging people to start getting active, we are healing people’s emotional state, building self confidence and reducing depression, suicide thoughts and anxiety.” Mthenjane, who is on the show every Tuesday and Saturday as part of the Mindful Movement team, might have enjoyed his exercise regimes in the surroundings of the game reserve, but he insists that it can be easily replicated from home by people of all ages. “It’s as simple as moving furniture aside, calling everyone in the house to join in and really exploring the simpleness of our workouts. “There is no extra equipment necessary, just you, your energy and water to stay hydrated.” Meanwhile, van Zyl explained that the 5 Colour Fitness show was created as a way to keep South Africans motivated, active and healthy during a time when they were subject to stringent lockdown conditions and when Covid-19 infections were rising rapidly in the country. “During the time we could not leave our homes, so we created this fun and interactive show that anyone could follow. People were able to follow a routine again, get up and get active, this contributed to their mental wellbeing and we laugh, we have fun and we get that blood flowing, which all contributes to a better you.” She said that they were determined to allow South Africans to get active at their own pace and doing exercises they enjoyed, instead of being forced to do. “We all have different training styles, personalities and needs when doing a workout, this is why we have introduced 5 different colours, each colour represents a training style and a team, for example if you are someone that loves to dance as part of a workout, you could join the Mindful Movement team.” The four other exercise options on the show are cardio, body balance, Interval training and bodyweight training. “We hope to inspire Africa and the world to live life well,” said van Zyl. Fitness and health can be for everyone, move more at home and wherever you are, go at your own pace, and feel comfortable with what you are able to do, one step at a time.” *The 5 Colour Fitness show is available seven days a week on SuperSport channels, DStv Catch-Up, their YouTube page as well as on Showmax. The Saturday Star