In this week’s A-typical interview, we feature South African actor Jack Devnarain. He is best known for his roles in the television series The Ghost  and the Darkness as well as Isidingo, where he plays the role of Rajesh Kumar. He has also featured on the big screen, starring in heist action film 31 million Reasons,  for which he received a Safta nomination for Best Lead Actor in a Feature Film. In 2018, he appeared in the South African Indian action crime film Mayfair. He played the supportive role of Jalaal in the film, which later received positive reviews. The film was also screened at the 62nd BFI London Film Festival and at the Africa in Motion Film Festival. You can step into a boxing ring with any South African celebrity for a fight. Who would you choose? Soli Philander. He has just turned 60,  and I’m a full 10  years younger. I reckon I can take him. Also, his pretty dreadlocks are his signature look, but I think they’re going to weigh him down in the ring. Then again, he does have a fiery temper … The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is? Lamb stew and dumplings. You are able to star alongside any actress in the world in a movie of your choice. Who do you choose? Toni Collette You are tasked with coming up with your own unique bunny chow. What are the main ingredients that go into that bunny chow? Curry and a  half loaf of bread. A bunny chow is a basic food. Don’t mess with it. The biggest misconception people have of Jack Devnarain is? That I tend towards serious, dramatic roles because I’m a serious, humourless kind of guy. I believe my strength lies in comedy. I’m really funny; really, I am. You are able to watch any live sporting event. Which sporting event do you choose to attend? The World’s Strongest Man. The movie you most loved as a child is? The NeverEnding Story. You’ve been elected as the president of South Africa. What is your first order of business? Strengthen investigative and law enforcement capacity so the widespread looting of state coffers can be stopped. Politicians have been stealing billions of rand at the expense of taxpayers who were sold an expectation of service delivery, housing and infrastructure. Government needs to win back some credibility. If you were stranded on a deserted island, and could only bring three things. What would you choose to bring and why? A satellite phone, solar battery charger and GPS. Because being stranded on a deserted island is career-limiting and I don’t fancy it. You're on death row. You are granted one last meal and drink. What do you choose to have? Raw octopus and swamp water. Because then I’d choose to die. The Saturday Star