In this week’s A-typical interview, we feature South African musician Sasha-Lee Davids. Davids was the 2009 co-winner of South African Idols season 5, and is also the winner of the 2008 reality TV show "Matrix" season 2. After winning Idols she released her début album, “Sasha-Lee”. She had the opportunity to work with Jamie Jones, lead singer of the Grammy Award winning group All-4-One, on a track entitled, “Before You”. Since then the Atlantis born singer has released several singles with her latest, “A Little Love”, released last month. Davids also starred in a reality TV show called The House of Davids or Huis van Davids. It showcased the lives of the Davids family and their involvement in the community of Atlantis. You are able to collaborate with any artist in the world. Who do you choose and why? Pentatonix. I grew up around lots of harmonies with my family, so it would be inspiring and lots of fun to be part of the amazing vocal arrangements, besides, my sisters year-old twins would totally freak out if they had to see them live:) The best and worst thing about being a musician in South Africa is? The best thing is that you get to make people smile and dance and through your music make them experience what you feel. Also knowing that there are loyal fans who will always have your back. The worst part is that the industry is fickle, you constantly have to come up with new ideas to stay relevant and on top of your game to keep people interested. Your most embarrassing moment on stage to date was....? There are a few, but I can't forget how the band had to play the intro to a song for what felt like 15 minutes because I couldn't remember the opening line. I stood there side stepping like a loser until I eventually heard the bassist shout out the first word. The crowd looked very confused but luckily they were in a good mood so they side-stepped with me lol Your fondest memory of growing up in Atlantis is ....? Definitely playing street games with my family and all our friends in the area like "drie stokkies", "hokkie" and a favourite of mine was running a fish and chips restaurant that consisted of stones, sand and leaves wrapped up in newspaper lol. Those were really awesome times where we didn't need or depend on toys or technology, we enjoyed the outside and came up with all sorts of things to keep us entertained. The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is..? Stews are definitely a reminder of home. Delicious one pot meals. Once you get the smell of the onion and garlic hitting the oil you know it's about to happen! What has it been like being a musician during the lockdown? Well to this day I think our particular industry is still trying to recover and navigate our way through the new normal. At first I was pretty shook by it, but I tried to use all that downtime to figure out what my next move is. Besides watching absolutely everything on Netflix, I focused most of my time on writing. Your celebrity crush growing up was....? It has always been Josh Groban What is the one thing that people don't know about Sasha-Lee Davids? I'm actually the opposite of serious. What would be a good theme song for your life? I was here by Beyonce What is the worst purchase you’ve ever made? I purchased a stunning looking black cape blazer online and it arrived looking like a priests cloak, lol. The Saturday Star