The words nobody (in a relationship) wants to hear. According to Urban Dictionary “It’s not you...it’s me” is: the biggest lie ever. It truly means, "it's not me, it's you“. It can be a warning sign for getting dumped or a way to get out of a relationship while causing yourself the least amount of grief possible. Ending a relationship is a hard conversation that we all have to have at some stage of our "adulting". And just ahead of Valentine’s Day, if Cupid’s arrows do not hit the mark, here are some tips on how to end a relationship without having to use those dreaded words. It all starts with understanding that there is no pain-free way to break up. We all wish that we could end relationships without any hurt or pain. But no matter how broken the relationship is, officially ending it will cause pain on both sides. Once you acknowledge that there will be pain, you can be prepared for the aftermath. Do it face-to-face. If you've ever been dumped by text or email, you know how it feels to be given so little consideration that the other person didn't even bother to tell you in person. Why do the same to another person? Your partner deserves the dignity of a face-to-face conversation. An intimate setting is arguably better, but if you are worried about your partner having a violent reaction, a public place is safer. Be honest but don't give too much detail. In general, people want to know why they're being dumped. While "you're terrible in bed" or "you lack ambition" might seem like an honest answer, it doesn't really preserve your partner's self-esteem or dignity. Using a reflexive sentence like "I don't feel we're compatible sexually" or "I don't think our long-term goals align anymore" are nicer ways to express your feelings. Don't do a play-by-play of the things the other person did wrong or use clichés like "it's not you, it's me“. Do not give in to arguments or protests. If the breakup is a surprise for the other person, they might try to argue, protest, or give reasons why you should remain together and try again one more time. If you are at the point of breaking up, nothing can restore or revive the relationship now. Giving in will only delay the inevitable. How to ask your boss for a raise Share your goals and ask for feedback. Have an honest and open conversation with your manager. Dont’ stop there, when you receive the feedback make sure you do it. Take on more responsibility. The only way to effectively do this is through careful time management. Understand the core strategy of the company you work for, don’t be afraid to ask the hard questions and align your priorities with that of the company. Proactively communicate your wins. Especially when you consistently exceed expectations in your current role. It’s not bragging if it is an accomplishment, and who best than you in setting up yourself for success. Demonstrate your accomplishments and added value. Show your value. You want to be able to demonstrate that you have taken on additional responsibilities and be able to provide specific examples about your accomplishments. Focus on why you deserve it (not why you need it). Before you can convince your boss that you deserve a raise, you need to believe that you’ve earned it. Practice your pitch and anticipate questions. Conversations in which you are asking for something almost always go better if you've rehearsed in advance and have considered the many possible responses that you'll get to each of your requests. Do your research. Before any salary negotiation, conduct background research to determine your market value. Be prepared to hear NO.  Don’t be discouraged by a no. It just means it is not the right time for the organisation to give you the raise you want. The Saturday Star