In this week’s A-typical interview we feature South African producer, director, and actor Sisanda Henna. Henna's successes include M-Net series Trackers which became one of the most viewed shows in the country. He also starred in Rogue alongside a seasoned global cast including Megan Fox, as well as Netflix hit series Agent. This year, Henna starred in Griekwastad (2020), an Afrikaans murder mystery, playing opposite Arnold Vosloo. Most recently he starred in hit MNet series Inconceivable, in which he plays the role of Sisanda Nkosi. He also runs Sisanda Henna Films, a boutique film company focused on a select number of projects per year, targeted at niche global  markets. He made a name for himself as an actor in 2003 starring in the TV series Tsha Tsha, in which he played the role of Sandile. You are given the option of starring alongside either Halle Berry or Charlize Theron in a Hollywood blockbuster. Who do you choose? Halle Berry for sure.  I love Charlize, but I would start with Halle and then do one with Charlize. It’s that brown skin thing, yeah. The deliciousness of brown skin on the big screen. Your favourite restaurant in South Africa is? And what do you normally order? My favourite restaurant in South Africa is Blaque Bistro, in Bryanston. There I order mogodu with dumplings and veg, served with Gemera (a home-made traditional beer they brew in-house). Your most challenging role as an actor was? My most challenging role as an actor was Lesego Moleko on Agent  (streaming on Netflix), which is up for this year’s Safta’s and Emmys. The character goes through so many different things over the series, which challenged the full spectrum of acting range. A joy and a challenge to play to this soccer star. You must see it. You are stuck on an island with your fellow cast members of Inconceivable. You have to split into teams of two in order to gather food and survive. Which cast member do you choose to team up with and why? Stuck on an island and need to survive. I pick Refilwe Madumo (who plays Busi, my wife) for sure. Why? Because she makes the toughest thing feel not so bad, and she has faith, which one would need in abundance :-) Your celebrity crush growing up was? Nia Long, and J-Lo The biggest misconception people have of Sisanda Henna is? Some people have only seen me in certain roles; Trackers, others have only seen Rogue, or Inconceivable, or Tsha Tsha  (the hit SABC series), and these are all distinct characters and they may think I am one thing – what they saw. But there’s an eclectic mix I am able to play, and continue to explore and discover more. The one thing your fans don't know about you is? I went to (what was then) Technikon Witwatersrand in Auckland park Joburg and studied Information Technology (software development) and graduated, thanks to the help of my supportive lecturers. In the final year, while doing my practicals – working for a bank, I landed my first leading role, and took two months off to shoot which means I lost two months of school. The head of the department organised for me to write a supplementary exam the following January which allowed me to graduate. Still grateful for that :-) What has caught your attention on social media in the last week? How the US has fresh winds of change. A person comments how an immigration official welcomes a Muslim person coming into the country, greets them in Arabic. Trump is gone, and things are different. You are  directing an exciting local drama movie. You can cast any two South African actors and any two South African  actresses of your choice. Who do you choose? I have just directed a drama, and I did cast my favourite actors and actresses, and my first born son is in the movie too – and he did an amazing job. Fulu, Motlatsi, Linda, Donovan, Buhle Samuels, and Micaiah Henna. Your current favourite three TV series are? 1) The Last Dance (an NBA documentary series), wow I love it so so much. I grew up playing basketball and watching every moment of Michael Jordan on the court. 2) Jack Ryan on Amazon. 3) OJ: Made in America (ESPN) directed by Ezra Edelman. The Saturday Star