Former Springbok coach Heyneke Meyer has opened up about the challenges and hardships his family faced during his tenure as a professional rugby coach, particularly during his stint with the national rugby team. Meyer coached the Springboks for three years, from 2012 to 2015, leading the Boks to a World Cup final. However his tenure as Bok coach also included a shock defeat to Japan in the 2015 Rugby World Cup, something that not only he took criticism for, but his family too. “It was really tough for the family, they got crucified. The kids read social media and so it was really tough on (them),” Meyer told the Saturday Star. “You may be fine and focused, but it’s very tough for the people around you. You get sworn at and taken on, so I am thankful for my family and the manner in which they stuck with me. If it wasn’t for them I wouldn’t have achieved any of my success.” His three sons in particular have had to deal with plenty of abuse. “They’ve gotten a lot of criticism, lost a lot of friends and it wasn’t easy being at school,” says Meyer. “I didn’t realise social media was so tough and so harsh, and obviously they are young so they read all that.” Meyer’s latest book “Heyneke Meyer 7 — My notes on leadership and life”, which he says is dedicated to his three sons, is not about his tenure as a highly decorated coach, but rather about the life lessons he learned over a coaching career that had incredible highs and lows. Meyer makes specific mention of the enormous sacrifices his family had to make during his career. Meyer not only coached the Springboks, but also the Bulls and the Stormers, and the Leicester Tigers in the UK. “You simply can’t do it alone and you need a really good support structure, and my family has been great,” said Meyer. “I only saw my middle son in the first 30 days of the first year of him being born, so you have to pay the price.” “Obviously it’s been tough on my family … and that’s why I have written my books, so they can be life lessons for my sons.” Meyers new book , which was launched recently, is currently the best selling sports book in the country, and is also in the top ten best selling books in the country, His book is anything but controversial, he says. “I didnt want to write an autobiography, because then you have to be controversial and you have to trample on toes and you have to be negative towards people to sell the book.” “The book was never about making money either. The book is about making a difference and helping people, especially during this time where we are battling with a pandemic. People have lost their jobs and businesses , and people are struggling with their personal lives.” “I thought I would rather be part of the solution and write something positive to inspire people.” “For me, it’s not about how many books I sell. If I can inspire just one person out there and help that person make a difference in his or her life, then it will be worthwhile for me.” Meyer says he’s already received amazing feedback since the launch. “I’ve received unbelievable feedback so far, so it's definitely been worthwhile for people and I'm very proud of the end product because I’ve really inspired people.” “ We wanted to write a short book that you can read in a day and a half a, short and sweet book about life principles and life lessons, and I think we’ve achieved that.” Meyer focuses on the important life lessons he learnt throughout his career. From his shock defeat to Japan, to leading the Bulls to a near impossible victory against the Reds in the Super Rugby cup. “I’ve learnt a lot of lessons and you keep learning as a coach, and you always are a student of the game.” “ That’s why I’ve written the book as well. I start of the book by telling the story of Sonny Liston when he took on Muhammed Ali. At that time Sonny was the best boxer in the world and nobody gave Ali a chance.” “In the fifth round of the fight , Ali was ready to give up, but his coach asked him to fight one more round. He pushed him into the ring. Ali had a good sixth round and in the seventh round, Sonny threw in the towel. People couldn’t believe it.” “The book is also about going out and fighting one more round. We have to keep fighting and that's the thing I’ve learnt as a coach.” Meyer, 53 now, by the age of 34 had been fired twice as coach of the Bulls and suffered the ignominy of losing all 11 games in the Super 12 of 2000. He also suffered the shock defeat to Japan , something which long lives on in the memory of Bok fans. Asked about his lowest moments of his career as a rugby coach, Meyer said: Every coach has highs and lows, and shock defeats and great wins, but my biggest disappointment wasn't a specific game.”  “There are a lot of games we lost and lots we won, but for me I was most disappointed where I didnt make a difference in the lives of the players I coached.” “It's an honour to coach and train young people and to inspire them,  and If I couldn't do that for them, that's one of the things that is a negative.” “Every single time a team doesn't perform was disappointing. You can do your planning and everything but if you can't get the best out of your players, it’s disappointing, especially with the Springboks, because you are representing your country.” “You carry the hopes of your entire nation, and if the team doesn't perform, obviously as a leader you take responsibility.” Meyer has also opened up about the shock defeat to Japan, saying the moment still haunts him all these years later. “Obviously,  I want to be remembered as a coach that really loves his country and that makes a difference in people's lives , and is passionate about my country and my team, but you also have to take responsibility, and that was a loss that really hurt.” “I am not here to make excuses, I took the loss on the chin and learned from that . At some point all top coaches had shock losses. But it’s not the manner of the defeat that's important, but it’s how you fight back that is.” “I had some great moments with the Springboks and I would like to be remembered for that , but that's not in my hands , I take responsibility, life goes on and you have to move on.” Meyer also admits his team wasn’t adequately prepared when they faced off against Japan. “I always knew we were undercooked, we were not well prepared,” said Meyer. “It was the Super Rugby 8 semi final and final just before that and our players were overplayed.” “We cut back on camps and training, so the first thing I would have done now is really fight more and fight for more training time with the franchise and SA rugby, and it should have been my responsibility to be better prepared” “We didnt have a lot of time and it's not an excuse. I should have bought more time and trust my gut.” “Hard work always beats talent, unless talent works. Japan’s team was six months in camp, and we weren’t even six weeks in camp.” “We’ve learnt from that, almost won the tournament, but yes I would have fought more , taken more responsibility and made sure we had more preparation time, for that I’m sorry.” He adds that it was very difficult to mentally overcome such a shock victory, but that the team had no option but to get ready for their next game in the tournament. “Well, we had to make sure we came back the very next game.  I really believe we played some of the best rugby after that and almost won the World Cup , against arguably the All Blacks greatest team. And the game could have gone either way, and they've admitted that too.” “I got the team in the very next day , and got a big mirror in, and asked each of them to go look in the mirror and look at their chest.” “The players were wearing their tracksuits and on the tracksuits they had the Springbok emblem. I said to the guys, listen here,  we  are Springboks , and we South Africans and are used to fighting and coming back ,especially if they have written us off, so we had to dig deep and unite as a team.” Despite some of the challenges and hardships he faced as Springbok manager, Meyer says coaching the Springboks was the highlight of his coaching career. “To coach the Springboks is an unbelievable honour. A lot of people ask how can you do it, because it's a tough job and you get lots of criticism and you don't have a private life . But it's always been my goal.” “The journey was great. It is such an unbelievable honour to have coached the national team. You can't explain it to people.” “ Facing the All Blacks and watching the Haka and coming up against arguably the best All Blacks team ever, that's when you really feel alive , and your adrenaline is pumping, and it feels like you're going to war, so I was truly blessed.” “Coaching the Springboks is like the pinnacle of your life, in a sense, and to be able to do that is a huge honour. It doesn't happen to people like me, it happens to great people, I’m just a normal guy.” The Saturday Star