Johannesburg - The acclaimed Santa Shoebox campaign which provides annual personalised donations for South Africa’s needy children during the festive season, is now assisting youngsters in another vital aspect. Some of the funds from the initiative is now also being used for the creation of reading hubs in 25 Early Childhood Development Centres (ECDs) in South Africa. “In addition, funds raised by the initiative have covered anti-bullying training for the facility caregivers, who will also be receiving training in the Reggio Emilia approach to preschool and primary education,” the Santa Shoebox campaign said. This recent activation is being backed by local musician and Freshlyground lead singer Zolani Mahola, who is also known for her storytelling and inspirational speaking work. The media personality said she is proud to be part of such a worthy cause. “The building blocks of a child's development start here and the story of a healthy child starts right here, so for me to be supporting this project of the reading corners, of widening children’s reading worlds,” she said. The Santa Shoebox Legacy has been accruing all private donations to the charity since 2017 up until the millionth shoe box was achieved in 2020 and this year it is expanding its reach with the theme, #beyondthemillion. These funds are funnelled towards initiatives that address food security, income generation, education, infrastructure support, gender-based violence, clean water and sanitation, affordable and clean electricity as well as climate action. The Santa Shoebox Project has three initiatives and the most familiar of these includes the Traditional Santa Shoebox which, over a period of 16 years, has provided 1 017 741 colourfully decorated boxes filled with toiletries, clothing, toys, sweets and school supplies. There is also the Virtual Santa Shoebox, purchased online by donors and available all year round, while the personalised Virtual Shoebox is made available from Mandela Day onwards each year. “These shoeboxes meet the needs of donors who live too far from drop-off points and are delivered to children living in far-flung rural areas,” the organisation said. Lastly, there is also the Santa Shoebox Legacy Project in which all operating costs are covered by its main corporate sponsors. “As part of the Project’s March to A Million drive, all privately donated funds over the past four years have been accruing under the Santa Shoebox Legacy fund,” the organisation said. They added that last year, a portion of these funds were allocated to Covid-19 relief projects, enabling the project to support a number of other NPOs in reaching their UN Sustainable Development Goals such as hunger relief, food security, tackling gender-based violence, clean energy, and clean water and sanitation.” “In addition, a créche was built in the Loskop District of rural KwaZulu-Natal.” While many strides have been made, the foundation is appealing for more boxes to be donated this year. The following items are required to complete a Santa Shoebox: 1. Standard sized shoe box or plastic container, colourfully decorated, with the lid wrapped separately 2. QR coded label, which will be emailed to the donor upon pledging online 3. Toothbrush 4. Toothpaste 5. Facecloth 6. Soap 7. Toy 8. Outfit of clothing 9. School supplies 10. Sweets All items must be new, unused and age-appropriate. The decorated Santa Shoeboxes need to be dropped off at central distribution points across the country on designated dates in October and November. A list of these can be found here. The Saturday Star