Johannesburg - After the success of her debut EP ‘Girl With Feelings’ and single, ‘Parties In The Park’ , musician Nasrene most recently released her new track ’Headspace’. We've all had some terrible dates. Tell us about the worst date you ever had? I've not had a terrible date yet, maybe I don't date enough for this to happen so the chances remain low, but I've had some really pointless and non-memorable experiences which, in my opinion, is sometimes worse. What are the three most popular items in your fridge at the moment? Almond milk Cheese (for the cheesy pizzas!) Maple syrup (which I only recently learnt should be kept in the fridge) Which South African musician has provided inspiration for you in your musical career? Jeremy Loops. Even though our musical styles are really different. I've always been inspired about how his authenticity can travel across the world. You can only shop at one store for the rest of your life. Which store do you choose to shop at? I've got to be practical about this. So I'm going to have to go with an all purpose store like Makro. Get my bread and garden furniture in one go. Your favourite item of clothing in your closet currently is....? My big yellow hoodie. It's warm and comfy. Can't live without it. The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is...? My moms kitchri (it's a South Asian dish made of rice and lentils) What is the biggest misconception people have of you...? I'm always surprised when people say that they're so proud of how fearless I am in following my dreams and knowing exactly what I want. I feel like this isn't all true. Is there anyone that is confident and sure? I think about and contemplate my purpose everyday and wonder if I'm doing the right thing, and although I love the journey I'm hardly fearless about it. The best and worst thing about living in Johannesburg is....? Best:  the great weather Worst:  no ocean to make the absolute most of the great weather. Which actress would play you, in a movie about your life? Mm... I would love to try out acting and play myself??? Is that allowed? Which artist are you currently listening to in your car? Nina Nesbitt. She is a songwriter, artist and producer. The full package in my eyes. The Saturday Star