Auto & General Insurance said it would fast track the insurance claims submitted by the scores of businesses which were affected by mass looting in KwaZulu-Natal and parts of Gauteng this week. This comes as the South African Special Risk Insurance Association (Sasria) announced that it has sufficient cash reserves to honour insurance claims resulting from the current civil unrest. The public enterprise provides non-life insurance cover for loss or damage to insured property caused by special risks such as politically motivated malicious acts, riots and strikes. Head of Auto & General Insurance Ricardo Coetzee said that due to the sheer number of claims received by Sasria, it may take some time for claims to be finalised. “While customers wait for their claim outcome from Sasria, they will no doubt face much uncertainty and we are concerned that, for businesses, this will result in business closures and job losses,” he said. To assist, Coetzee explained that once a valid Sasria related claim has been captured by Auto & General, they will make interim payments to assist their clients to “get back on their feet.” Sasria is bought through insurance companies who are responsible for the administration of Sasria cover. It automatically includes vehicles that are currently financed, and optional for those whose vehicles are not financed or for those insuring their business, house or home contents. “This is an unprecedented move to help rebuild South Africa and applies to claims submitted by both business insurance and personal lines insurance customers,” said Coetzee. Auto & General notes the usual Sasria claims process for those affected by the unrest: - Contact your insurance company directly as they are responsible for the administration of your Sasria claim, and will request the necessary information and documentation from you to proceed with your claim. –  Your insurance company will report your claim to Sasria on your behalf. –  Report the incident to the police as soon as possible and get a case number. –  Insurance customers must claim, or notify their insurance company of the intention to claim under this policy within 30 days of the date from when the damage occurred. The Saturday Star