Jade Voges has been hard at work over the last few months. Aside from juggling her responsibilities as a successful model, producer , TV personality and businesswoman , Voges has spent her spare time campaigning for the upcoming Miss South Africa pageant. Having missed out on her chance to compete in last year's beauty pageant , Voges is determined to make the cut this year. She’s spent a substantial amount of time working closely with youth in South Africa and started an outreach program at the Good Hope School. She’s also spent time at the Lighthouse Baby Shelter in Randburg. IOL caught up with the 23-year-old to chat about her campaign work for the prestigious beauty competition, which takes place in a few months' time. She also opens up about her views on pressing issues in SA currently like Gender Based Violence (GBV) and bullying. You’ve spent the last couple of months campaigning for the Miss SA competition. What has the journey been like so far? I had entered the competition last year when the application videos were done online. I campaigned prior to lockdown as physically as I could however, I believe this time my preparation has been done very much internally this time around. I have faced many challenges on my journey and I have learned valuable life lessons that I can hopefully pass on to others. I have overcome and through the trials I found my strength, faith, patience, wisdom and purpose which I believe is completely aligned with the competition. The journey has been incredible, I have found so much strength, faith, patience, wisdom and purpose as I have learnt more about myself and what I believe in. I had overcome many trials and with it came multiple blessings. You did an outreach program at the Good Hope School as part of your campaigning. Can you tell me a bit about that and why you decided on choosing Good Hope School? I have a deep love and passion for South Africa’s youth generation. I believe that children are the building blocks for our future and in order for the future generations to succeed, we need to empower our youth. Every child deserves a good education and I believe this can be done with the help of technology. Good Hope School was my most recent program however, I also spent my time at The Lighthouse Baby Shelter in Randburg. Unfortunately, due to Covid you are unable to interact with the children however I often collect and drop off food packs for them. Good Hope School were celebrating their last day of term and together with Bread Winners, we were fortunate enough to provide every scholar with a lunch pack. What was even more exciting is that we also had the opportunity to provide each child with a stationery pack for holiday homework and studying. They were so happy! What kind of work are you doing at the Good Hope School and what has been the best part about working there? With the outreach program, each scholar was given a hotdog, a packet of sweets and water for lunch. I was fortunate enough to interact with the children and hand out the supplies. The stationery packs included pens, pencils, rulers, rubbers, a sharpener and a book. I am planning to do a school tour from next month where I will be informing our youth on the new career choices available and also assisting them with preparations for TVET or tertiary studies. I am an individual who loves the tangible and physical side of serving and because of that, the best part for me has been knowing handing out the packs and interacting with the children. I love asking them questions and hearing stories about the challenges and needs of our youth and coming up with solutions on how we could do better. What has it been like campaigning during a pandemic when things are challenging? There is a definite difference in capabilities with the masks and restrictions but we cannot let it stop us from serving others. We need to serve but we need to do it in the safest way possible. I think that the ability to campaign when things are tough, spreads the message of Ubuntu even more. It is even more inspiring now than it has ever been to spread love and that is precisely the reason why it should be done. In your personal opinion, what does it take to win a prestigious competition such as Miss SA? I believe it takes a lot of hard work, persistence, consistency and someone who has an authentic purpose of serving the country and its people. Gone are the days where women just needed to be beautiful and have a good figure to win a pageant, today it’s more about the ambition of the woman to see a better South Africa, it’s about the heart of the woman that wants to impact lives positively. I’m so grateful that we look at pageants in this way now. A Miss South Africa is a woman who is confident in who she is and believes that her flaws are not her weakness, but what makes her beautiful. She is someone who has faced many challenges but has not only overcome them, but has done so with grace, respect and humility and finds every challenge as an opportunity for growth. She is someone who stands up for what she believes is right and speaks her truth, fearlessly. A Miss South Africa is a woman who is driven daily by a purpose to serve and she is someone who truly believes she can bring about world change. What is the most important issue your generation is facing at the moment? I think that one of the most important issues that our generation is currently facing is that of mental health. The pandemic took a strain on many individuals in drastic ways and everyone has been affected in some way or the other. The statistics for psychologist calls have doubled and many people need help and they are too afraid to talk about it. I just want everyone to know that they are not alone and they can get through it. I want the world to know the importance of hope and holding on for one more day even when there seems like no light at the end of the tunnel. We often see the best parts of people online and we forget that we are all human and everyone is facing something they are not talking about. That is why I find so much importance in being kind and showing respect to everyone you encounter. In addition, the pressures of social media and the unnecessary stress it causes on our youth, this fast life mindset that is expected of everyone for them to be seen as successful is wrong and completely unrealistic, most people can’t live up to that extreme high standard and unfortunately many lose their lives because of the pressures of fitting in. We need to build a generation that understands that being yourself is gold and true happiness is better than superficial happiness on social media. We need to education our youth on how to use social media more productively. The fear of failure is also something that affects so many of our youth, most of them don’t go after their goals and dreams because of the fear of being ridiculed if they fail. Instead of trying to achieve a goal which in most cases will be achieved or if not they will learn valuable lessons throughout the process that will help them improve instead they just give up altogether and never reach the levels they were meant to achieve. I want to inspire people to believe in themselves, never take no for an answer and never give up. What is the most important thing you’ve learned over the past year during lockdown? I have learned that when a door closes there will be 5 more doors down the hallway for you, you just have to keep walking. I’ve also learnt that adapting is so important if you truly want to get through something like this. However, the most important thing that I have learnt is that South Africa and its people are beautiful and have incredible hearts. Over the last year I have seen every day South Africans stand up and do whatever they can to make the country better, I saw people unite and help each other to get through this tough time. I’m truly proud of our country and its people. We have really showed compassion by wearing masks, sanitizing, prioritizing each other and adhering to the restrictions. We have all united through pain but we will come out stronger, together. Bullying is a major issue in SA and around the world currently. Were you bullied as a child? And if so, how did you deal with it? Absolutely. Bullying is a major contributor to youth suicides and it needs to end. I was definitely bullied in school and it really is a hard thing to overcome. The way I dealt with it was just to love myself even more. I never listened to what they would say about me because I always focused on what I wanted out of life. I felt sorry for them because I understand that hurt people hurt people and I tried my best to treat it with kindness. It is also important to speak up about it and tell somebody who you trust and do something about it. More awareness needs to be raised around the topic, especially now with the rise of cyber bullying. It is important to have support around you and have people that you are able to reach out to. How are you preparing for the upcoming Miss SA competition? Apart from my outreach activities, the way in which I have been personally preparing is by taking a holistic approach to my health. I have focused on three main areas being mind, body and soul and I make it a mission to continue to grow in each aspect everyday. I have been ensuring that my mental health stays strong and I have been taking care of my body by eating healthier as well as a combination of gym and outdoor hikes, which I love. On a personal level, I have continued growing in my faith, praying for guidance and wisdom. I think I have watched every pageant video online and every Miss SA competition I could get my hands on. I have been studying our country's history, critical challenges and needs and I have really listened to the people in order to focus on forecasting for the future. I genuinely want to see a change in the world and I believe that change starts with me. Besides my aim at scholastic outreach programs, I am also passionate about women empowerment and I am currently working on collaborating with a local restaurant and starting monthly workshops whereby women are invited to attend and are empowered and mentored through conversation by professionals. Each workshop will aim to discuss a topic that relates to challenges women face daily. You are a model, TV Presenter and a businesswoman among other things. With everything that you have going on, how will you handle the responsibilities of the crown if you are chosen? I understand the responsibility that comes with taking the prestigious crown of Miss South Africa and I have decided to make it my full time job to serve as Miss SA should I be fortunate enough to make it through this year. I believe that it’s important that I give all my time and effort during my year to positively impact the lives of South Africans. Being in the industry for the most part of my life has somewhat prepared me for this platform. If I was Miss South Africa, I would without a doubt devote the year entirely to the organization and its activities. The responsibilities would always be my number one priority. Post-competition, I would love to continue my work as is but also release a few books, obtain another qualification, mentor women and open a few businesses in different industries which are aimed at providing quick employment and empowering our economy. I have a lot of ideas to bring about change in many aspects where we need it and I would love to devote my life to being hands on in bringing about that change. I have always ensured my work aligned with a personal motto close to my heart and that is “Beauty with a purpose.” This means that everything I do must be done for a good, impactful reason and that true beauty is not what you look like, but what your heart looks like. What’s your view on gender-based violence in South Africa? As of 2020, South Africa remained as the hotspot for gender-based violence in the entire world. During lockdown, gender-based violence was nicknamed “South Africa’s Second Pandemic.” Our country has the most beautiful destinations, diversity and so much to offer and we could stand for so much more to the rest of the world if we all united and stood up against gender-based violence in every form on a daily basis. I believe that gender-based violence can only be solved if we spend more time on education. We need to educate the men in the country on the importance of respecting women and protecting women. We also need to educate women on what is acceptable in a healthy relationship and give them platforms and networks that they can go to immediately if they are ever in a position of being harmed. We need to build stronger communities where the general standard of morals and values are so high that harming your partner is seen as completely wrong and taboo. We need men to hold each other accountable and if we manage to implement these changes, I believe we will reduce the high percentage of gender-based violence in South Africa. I also think it is imperative that all women are taught about safety and self defense in order to protect themselves and this could also be done through workshops, online classes and more. Should you be crowned Miss SA, what is the first issue you will tackle? I am passionate about building a strong foundation for our country’s future generations and that it can be done by creating employment opportunities. Unfortunately due to the pandemic many small businesses and even larger companies closed their doors. Well known businesses we have all loved for years are now no more. Greyhound, Citliner and even our beloved Musica have not survived. We need to aim at rectifying the economy through employment. I want to inform our people especially the youth, of the various opportunities available to them, from TVET colleges to all the new employment that is created because of the birth of the 4th industrial revolution. Our youth are not adequately informed of the new and various types of employment available to them and we need to educate them on how to be independent and create. We need to educate our people and make sure they get the opportunity to grow and develop because if you impact one person in a community the entire community will benefit. The Saturday Star