This week, we feature South African celebrity make-up artist Morag Steyn. Steyn is regarded as one of the best celebrity make-up and hair artists in Africa. She has worked with local and international celebrities and spent a lengthy amount of time in India, working in the Bollywood industry. She’s worked with celebs such as Clean Bandit, Randeep Hooda, Minnie Dlamini Jones, Pearl Thusi, Roxy Burger and Idris Elba. Her fashion expertise has also been used by influential designers like Quiteria & George (Africa Fashion Week, Campaign Shoot &; a recently designed gown for Beyoncé), David Tlale (New York & Paris Fashion Week), Thula Sindi (Africa Fashion Week), Rocky Star (Photoshoot), and Vikram Phadnis (Africa Bollywood Fashion Week) and Neeta Lula (Photoshoot) to name a few. In addition, Morag has worked on major motion pictures, such as the upcoming Spotlight  as well as Angelielna (due for release next year). She has also worked with a myriad brands in her career, among them Tally Weijl (Switzerland), Park Avenue (Asia), Steve Madden (India), Femina Flaunt (India), Lotus Arts de Vivre (Asia), Skagen (Denmark), Fossil (US), FCUK (Asia), Under Armour (Africa), New Balance (Middle East), Reebok (India), among others. You are able to do make-up on any celebrity in the world. Who do you choose? Jennifer Lopez. I think she is literally the most beautiful woman in the world. It would be an honour to do her make-up as she has always been my muse. The most rewarding thing about your job? Seeing my work on massive billboards and in films is my trophy. I guess, for all artists, it is also when you are able to create a masterpiece from a bare canvas into something magic and the look on the client’s face when they first look in the mirror and see the transformation. That for me is always a priceless moment. What's the one make-up accessory you cannot live without? An eyelash curler. The best and worst part about staying in India? The best is the culture, the love and the adventure. The worst is the poverty and the humidity. You can eat only one meal for the rest of your life. What do you choose to eat? Such a hard question because I love food, but I would say probably Bhindi Masala Fry. (An Indian dish made from okra). What has caught your attention on social media in the past week? Most things that catch my attention are positive reels. The world is so negative at the moment, it's refreshing to see videos of people sharing kindness and love. Your favourite item of clothing in your wardrobe? My custom-made kutch embroidery denim jacket that my mom helped me curate. You can spend the day with any person in the world, learning his or her trade. Who do you choose to spend it with? Definitely Jordan Belford or David Icke. Your celebrity crush growing up? Definitely Tyson Beckford and Travis Fimmel If you could go back in time and change anything about your life. What moment would you choose to change, if any? I would have travelled the world sooner for my work. But I do believe that we are all exactly where we need to be. The Saturday Star