This week we feature South African actress, TV presenter, and voice-over artist Mampho Brescia. She is widely known for her role in the  M-Net drama series Jacob’s Cross, where she plays the part of Zanele, as well as her role as Iris Zungu on popular local drama Isibaya. Since her debut as an actress in 1998, Brescia has appeared in a number of prominent TV roles, as well as film roles, including hit local film District 9 and Swop. Her latest work includes a role in Netflix’s new gripping film I Am All Girls, which releases next month. The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is....? Can’t say it’s a meal, but amakipkip. What is the worst purchase you have ever made in your life? My car, a  depreciating asset. I say this because I have come to understand the time value of money and the fact that capital appreciates if it is wisely allocated. The ability to save and invest from a young age is one that I wish was more widespread. You can work alongside any South African actor/actress in a hit movie. Who do you choose to work alongside and why? My BFF Terry Pheto, we have too much fun together! We teach each other a lot about the craft and life in general. Your favourite role as an actress to date is.....? I would say Iris, she took up a lot of my time, eight years to be exact. And I would say the character in I Am All Girls. I loved working with Donovan Marsh and a strong female led cast. If you had to switch places with another famous person for a day,  who would it be with? Tom Hardy, I think he has an incredible work ethic, I love what he’s done with all the characters he has portrayed. He is deeply intense and focused. He knows how to play.  He is such a bad ass. You are stuck on an island with your fellow cast members of Isibaya. You have to split into teams of two in order to gather food and survive. Which cast member do you choose to team up with? Definitely Celeste, Pallance, Sdumo and Lerato. The guys will do the heavy lifting. There will be lots of laughs and a combination of great minds, that can act their way through any obstacle. Your celebrity crush growing up was....? Macgyver The three food items you cannot live without are...? Definitely red wine, broccoli and avocado. What series are you currently binging on? The Hand of God and Dead Places. What one thing has caught your attention on social media in the past week? The bullying that lead to the eventual suicide of Lufuno. We as a society failed that little girl. The Saturday Star