South Africa is full of talent with the likes of Trevor Noah, Charlize Theron and DJ Black Coffee some of the finest examples of what the nation has to offer. In a bid to give even more South Africans a chance to shine on the international stage, a brand new reality show is set to debut in full view of some of the world’s best talent scouts. The Live Your Dream television show, which is set to kick off in July and will be broadcast on ViaTV twice a month on Saturdays at midday, aims to find the next generation of talented South African actors, singers, models, dancers and voice-over artists. The show does not follow the usual competition format. Instead participants will audition in front of six world renowned American agents and industry professionals with the aim of obtaining an international education and building their networks. Apart from simply providing a stage for these aspiring talents to shine, talent agency head Elsubie Verlinden, who is spearheading the project as the director of 33 and Me Talent Agency, told the Saturday Star this week that there is a valuable pool of talented South Africans who can go on to have lifelong and international careers. “We are defined as a third world country but we definitely have first world potential,” she said. “There is ultimate hunger and desire for success in the youth of today and it is our responsibility to lead them into greatness and build a strong foundation for a better tomorrow.” With the Live Your Dream programme, Verlinden insists that they are looking for potential and not perfection and that the show will hope to also make the nation proud. “Live Your Dream will capture the stories of the untold, inspire the unknown and drive the dreams of many hopefuls in our nation.” Verlinden is no stranger in working with and unearthing young local talents. Apart from her forthcoming duties on the Live Your Dream reality show, she also runs the International ARTS Talent Showcase (IATS) which gives aspiring artists the opportunity to audition in front of international talent scouts. “This (IATS) project has changed the film and fashion industry over the past 11 years both locally and internationally. I am very passionate about making dreams a living reality for individuals that might have never had a fair chance at making it in the industry.” Through her work, Verlinden has managed to book her talents for over 1500 TV commercials in South Africa and abroad. Over 11 years, she has also managed to secure talents to work with the likes of Marvel, Disney, Louis Vuitton, Paris Fashion Week and New York Fashion Week. “To top that, we have also had two of our alumni make it to the American Idol television round.” Verlinden’s desire to assist emerging talents stems from her own struggles with working in the highly competitive entertainment industry. “From my experience as a struggling actress and commercial model entering into the industry, I knew first hand how hard it can be,” she explained. “‘The lessons I learnt and the disappointments I endured all drove me to a point 13 years ago to become an agent and give back to other hopefuls what I never had in the industry.” As a mentor, the talent agency head hopes to help create casting opportunities for local talents but she also helps them find international educational bursaries in order for them to have a long and successful international career. But with the Live Your Dream reality TV show, Verlinden hopes to discover even more talented local gems, and for this reason auditions are open for aspiring and established artists and models to attend. She has already been impressed with the audition turn-out. “Our auditions are always full to capacity according to the current regulation.” While there are other talent shows similar to Live Your Dreams, Verlinden believes their show is unique. “We set trends, and drive the dreams of the industry according to what local and international markets need and discover hopefuls accordingly.” Verlinden conceded that not all those who audition for the show will be successful but her advice for aspiring actors, singers, models, dancers and voice-over artists is simple: “Remember that character is key and that while talent takes you there, character keeps you there. “You can’t have a million dollar dream with a minimum wage work ethic so don’t be afraid to go the extra mile because your dreams won’t work unless you do.” The Live Your Dream programme runs hand in hand with the Be Your Dream TV Show on ViaTV Channel 147 and will also host numerous workshops and educational training sessions alongside live screenings of the company’s annual auditions for the IATS. The first auditions were held in Cape Town last weekend with more in other cities expected to kick off soon. For more information, email info@itsartsafrica.co.za. The Saturday Star