By Ofentse Morwane SOUTH Africa has arguably the most progressive constitution on the African continent. And in comparison to other African states, South Africans understandably hold their democracy to high standards. Despite challenges such as the high levels of crime and corruption, they continue to view this democracy with rose-tinted glasses. It is the best, they will boast. The constitution has fostered a human rights culture through the bill of rights, which is the cornerstone of the democracy in the country. It enshrines the rights of all the people in the country and affirms the democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. Importantly, we have moved swiftly to pass laws that protect the rights of vulnerable people including children, women and people living with disabilities. Many women, particularly in the rural areas, are still subjected to poverty and unemployment. However, the country has worked diligently to advance the rights of women and improve their representation. There is undoubtedly an improved picture. As a country, we have made significant strides to advance gender equality in relation to reproductive health, sexual orientation, access to justice and customary law. Our biggest headache perhaps is the high levels of domestic and sexual violence. We have admitted that the scourge of gender-based violence is unacceptable. But there is progress in access to justice and support for victims. Polyandry has set tongues wagging since the Department of Home Affairs gazetted a new green paper for the Marriage Act earlier this month. The reaction of men has been predictable. They are furious. It would allow women to be married to more than one man at the same time. I am against polygamy the same way I am opposed to polyandry. Instead of scrapping polygamy, we are exacerbating our problems. South Africa has high prevalence of social ills. These include violent crimes that are perpetrated against women by their loved ones. Now enter polyandry into the fray and we are heading for a disastrous situation. I don’t think it will help us to combat gender-based violence. South Africa has the biggest HIV/AIDS prevalence in the world. Polyandry will not help our cause to eradicate this disease. South Africans are not getting value for money from those on the parliamentary benches. They have run out of ideas. Essentially, Members of Parliament are elected on the expectation that they will debate and come up with pertinent issues that matter to the people of this country. It would have been interesting to see what gender activists’ views will be. We are all in consensus that our gender-responsive laws should strive to empower women and liberate them from the shackles of patriarchy and oppression. There is more we should do to attain this. With such an elaborative level of social ills in the country, polyandry will be a move in the wrong direction. Members of the public have until the end of June to comment on the Green Paper. Interesting times. The Saturday Star