This week, we feature South African radio host, MC and storyteller Boipelo Mooketsi. Mooketsi is best known as the host of the #5WeekendNights show every weekend on popular radio station 5FM. Her professional journey with radio began at Vow FM, where she worked tirelessly to earn her first daytime show titled Area Code. She is also a storyteller, AFDA and Phakama Women's Academy graduate. Her love for speaking grew in high school where she excelled in debating and public speaking clubs. She turned her passion for speaking into a business when she started MC-ing at corporate events. You've been given the opportunity to interview EFF president Julius Malema live on air for ten minutes. What are the first three questions you would ask him? The first question I’d ask is, what difference/change can we expect as a nation with you as the president? Second, besides yourself, who do you think is best fit to run our country? Last, how would you convince a first-time voter that voting for the EFF is a good decision? The meal that most reminds you of your childhood is … Cheesy Pilchard Fish pasta. That was the first meal I learned how to cook.. honestly because it was the easiest and quickest meal to prepare and it’s  delicious! Add some mayo to it and you’ve got a hit. Your go-to song to get you ready for the day is … Beyonce – Formation. It gets me pumped. It reminds me that “I slay”. What is the one thing that has captured your attention on social media in the past week? It’s been an interesting week with nominations of different award ceremonies being revealed, but what caught my attention is how nominees are generated and the different criteria and processes involved in selecting nominees and winners. Which actress would you choose to play you in a story about your life? Thembisa Mdoda. I love her energy and I somehow relate to her so I think she’d do a great job. Your most embarrassing moment as a teen was  … Preparing all week for a talent show performance with two of my other schoolmates, then getting all my friends and family to come and support only for the show runner to refuse for us to get on stage. Everyone was so disappointed, lol I was really embarrassed, shame. Your favourite restaurant to go to is … And what do you order? I’m really enjoying the Anti-Social Club in Melville. Their Bacon-Avo n Cheese burger and their wings are divine! The one thing that people don't know about Boipelo Mooketsi is? I’m my biggest critic and I sometimes give myself a really hard time when it comes to perfecting my craft. Especially when I make mistakes but learning that it’s okay to make mistakes has allowed me to grow tremendously so I’m grateful. You've won the lottery. You are now R50 million richer. What are the first three things you would buy? I’m not the biggest fan of material things, I believe in acts of service so I would help my immediate family with their financial woes, then buy myself a house and a car. You are able to have a debate with any well-known figure in the world. Who do you choose to go up against and why? Iyanla Vanzant. I love her mind and opinions so it wouldn’t be a debate but I don’t always agree with her views so I would love to pick  her mind. I think it would be a rewarding conversation and I could learn from her. The Saturday Star