This week, we feature South African actress and TV presenter Roxy Burger. The 34-year-old  has hosted shows on nearly every broadcasting network in South Africa, from her flagship appearance on MNet’s KTV to Strictly Come Dancing, Top Billing and MTV. She’s also interviewed some of the biggest celebrities from around the globe, including Emilia Clarke, Rihanna, Larry King, Chris Brown, Liam Neeson, Sam Worthington, Jessica Alba, Maroon 5 and former president Thabo Mbeki. Burger was also a celebrity contestant on  M-Net reality competition Survivor South Africa: Maldives, in 2011. She is now the host of E!’s How Do I Look? SA and also runs a popular lifestyle blog. The one thing you cannot wait to do once lockdown is over is? TRAVEL TRAVEL TRAVEL! Passport gang, you feel me? The most challenging aspect of being a mom is... ? I think the lack of spontaneity that once was. Can’t just do anything on a whim anymore. Your current favourite restaurant in SA is...? And what do you order? I don't really go out, haha, pandemic babes. But when we splurge it would have been to Saint. You are stranded on a desert island and can only take three items with you, what would they be? I have been (Survivor). But all you need is a fancy satellite phone to call someone and help you get out of there. What is the most important thing you have learnt during the lockdown? That your mental health is EVERYTHING. Look after your mind. You can't pour from an empty cup. You can shop at only one store for the rest of your life, which store do you choose and why? Online: ASOS.com What one thing has grabbed your attention on social media in the past week? I actually try and limit social media interaction these days to be honest and have culled my feed quite ferociously - but if you pressed me for an answer it would be my own new venture’s page, @The.Piercery - a luxe piercing parlour where we focus on the art of curation. The secret to a happy marriage is...? Give and take plus constant open and honest communication. The one meal that most reminds you of your childhood is...? A good old braai! With my mom's homemade milk tart. You've been invited to a charity boxing match. You can take on any SA celeb in a 12 round fight. Who do you choose to take on? I would concede and donate money for my concession - I don't think I could do it! LOL! The Saturday Star